.TH jsoncalc 1
.SH NAME
jsoncalc \- JSON calculator and reformatter

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B jsoncalc
.RI [ OPTION ] 
.RI [ file.jc ]
.RI [ "name\fB=\fIvalue" ]
.RI [ file.json ]...

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B jsoncalc
is a tool for examining or modifying JSON data.
It can be run interactively or in batch mode.
It integrates well with shell scripts.

.SH OPTIONS
The typical
.B --help
and
.B --version
options are supported.
Other than that, all options are short.
.TP
.BI -c command
Apply 
.I command
to the JSON data.
The JSON data will typically come from *.json files also given in the
command line.
Any results will be written to stdout.
This option can be repeated to supply multiple commands to run.

.TP
.BI -f file
Read an expression from a file, and apply it to the JSON data.
Again, the JSON data will typically come from *.json files named on the command line.
This option can be repeated to supply multiple script files to load.
You can also mix it with
.BI -c command
if you want.
.TP

Also, if the first file named after the last option appears to contain a
JsonCalc script instead of JSON data, then it will be loaded like
.BI -f file.

.TP
.B -i
Force interactive mode.
Usually interactive mode is implied by the lack of
.BI -c expression,
.BI -f file
or 
.BI -O format,
but if you want to use some of those flags then 
.B -i
option makes it clear.

.TP
-u
This option allows JsonCalc to update any data files named on the command line,
if their data was changed via assignments.
This is often used when JsonCalc is constructing JSON documents from other data
sources such as environment variables or
.IB name = value
arguments on the shell command line.

.TP
.BR -o | -a
These affect JsonCalc's behavior when trying to load a file that doesn't exist.
Normally that's an error, but
.B -o
and
.B -a
cause it to load missing files as empty objects or arrays, respectively.
This can be handy if you're using JsonCalc to construct a JSON document
from scratch.
You'll usually want
.B -u
too.

.TP
.B -r
Restricted mode.
This inhibits some dangerous activities such as invoking an external shell
command, or reading/writing files not named on the command line.
This sofware is distributed with no guarantees of any kind.
And even if
.B jsoncalc
itself is perfect, plugins might not be.

.TP
.BI -d directory
Causes any unresolved names in an expression to be interpretted as
a request to load
.IR dir / name .json
as variable
.IR name .
For example, if you invoke JsonCalc with
.BI -d foo
and then use the name "bar" in an expression,
JsonCalc will load foo/bar.json into the "bar" variable.
This happens on demand; it doesn't proactively load all files in the "foo"
directory into variables.

.TP
.BI -D directory
This is like
.BI -d dir
except that uppercase
.BI -D dir
is persistent across invocations, for interactive use only.
If you want to remove a directory from the persistent list, put a "-" before
the directory name, as in
.BI -D- dir.

.TP
.BI -j flags
Sets debugging flags.
.I flags
is a string of letters representing the debugging features to enable.
The letters are
.B t
to output tokens as they're parsed,
.B f
for files as each chunk is read,
.B b
to output the remaining buffer,
.B a
to call abort() on a JSON error,
.B e
to output info for json_by_expr(), or
.B c
to output info for json_calc().

.TP
.BI -s settings
This controls the output format, colors, and some other features.
See the "SETTINGS" section, below.

.TP
.BI -S settings
This is like
.BI -s settings
except that uppercase
.BI -S settings
is persistent across invocations, for interactive invocations only.

.TP
.BI -l plugin , settings
This loads a plugin.
Most plugins are binary files that get linked into
.B jsoncalc
at runtime, to provide new functions, commands, file formats, or other features.
Some plugins may be implemented in
.BR jsoncalc 's
scripting language.
If a plugin supports settings, then you can set them by appending them after
the plugin's name, with a comma as a delimiter.

.TP
.BI -L plugin , settings
This is like
.BI -l plugin , settings
except that uppercase
.BI -L plugin , settings
is persistent across invocations, for interactive invocations only.
To remove a plugin from the list, use a "-" before the plugin name, as in
.BI -L- plugin .

.P
Note that the uppercase
.BI -D directory ,
.BI -S settings ,
and
.BI -L plugin
options are all like the corresponding lowercase option, except that
the uppercase versions are persistent across interactive invocations.
This can be very convenient.
They intentionally don't apply for batch-mode invocations because there
you want a consistent environment for the script to run in.
If a script needs certain plugins to be loaded, it should use the
.B plugin
command to explicitly say so.

.SH "SETTINGS"
The
.BI -s settings
option mostly controls the output format.
The
.I format
is a series of names or
.IR name = value
pairs.
.P
Most settings are boolean.
You can turn them on just by giving their name, or turn them off by
 prepending "no" to the name.
For example, "-spretty" will enable pretty-printing, and "-snocolor" will
disable colors in the output.
.P
Some options are strings that have a list of preferred values associated
with them.
You can give just the value, without a name, and
.B jsoncalc
will figure out which name it belongs to.
For example, there's a "table" setting with a list of preferred values that
includes "csv", so if you want tables to be output in CSV format, you could
either say "-stable=csv" or simply "-scsv".

.P
The main output format options are:
.TS
c c l.
NAME	TYPE	MEANING
tab	number	Indentation to add for each layer while pretty-printing.
oneline	number	If >0, JSON data shorter than this won't pretty-print.
digits	number	Precision when converting floating point to text.
elem	boolean	For top-level arrays, output elements one-per-line.
table	string	One of csv/sh/grid/json to control table output.
csv	boolean	Output tables in CSV format.
sh	boolean	Output tables as shell variable assignments.
grid	boolean Output tables as columns and rows.
string	boolean	If the output is a string, just output its text.
pretty	boolean	Add whitespace to show the structure of the data.
color	boolean	Enable the use of color on ANSI terminals.
ascii	boolean	Don't output non-ASCII characters; use \euXXXX instead.
prefix	string	For "sh" output, prepend this to variable names.
null	string	How to display null in "grid" format.
.TE
.P
Additionally, there are sections to select the color and other attributes of
certain types of text output.
These are whole objects, not simple strings/boolean/numbers.
The
.I settings
parser handles this pretty well, though.
When setting the value of an object, everything up to the next comma or
end of the setting is interpreted as a space-delimit list of settings within
that object.
For example, you can set the attributes of the column headers in the "grid"
table output format via a string such as "-sgridhead=italic underlined yellow".
The "italic" and "underlined" settings are boolean, and "yellow" is in the
preferred value list for the "fg" (foreground color) setting.
.P
The types of text that can have their attributes set this way include
.B result
(normal output),
.B error
(error messages),
.B gridhead
(column headings in "table=grid" format)
and
.B gridline
(Column separators in "table=grid").
Their attributes are:
.TS
c c l.
bold	boolean	Boldface or bright
dim	boolean	Dim
italic	boolean	Italic or oblique
underline	boolean	A line under the text
linethru	boolean	A line through the midline of the text
blinking	boolean	Nasty blinking text
fg	string	Foreground color: normal, black, red, green, yellow, blue, magenta, cyan, or white
bg	string	Background color, like "fg" with with "on " prepended, such as "on red"

.SS "SH OUTPUT"
The "sh" table output format deserves a bit more discussion.
Each row of the table will be output as a line of multiple
.IR name = value
pairs, giving the values for all columns of the table in that row.
In a shell script, you can read the lines and evaluate them one-by-one like this:
.nf
    jsoncalc -ssh -c scores sampledata/test.json | while read row
    do
        eval $row
        echo name=$name, score=$score
    done
.fi
.P
If you expect the output to be a single object then you can use
.BR bash (1)'s
"$(...)" notation, like this:
.nf
    eval $(jsoncalc -Osh -c 'scores[name:"peter"]' test.json)
    echo score=$score
.fi

.SH "EXPRESSION SYNTAX"
The expression syntax resembles that of JavaScript expressions,
but with database-like extensions.
For a full description of the syntax, see the
JsonCalc web page.
In short, though, the extensions are:
.IP \ \(bu 3n
.IB array @ filter
and
.IB array @@ filter
operators to transform arrays.
.IP \ \(bu 3n
A
.IB table @= table,
.IB table @< table
and
.IB table @> table

database join operators.
.B @=
is natural join,
.B @<
is left join, and
.B @>
is right join.
A table is simply an array of objects.
.IP \ \(bu 3n
.IB table .orderBy( columns )
and
.IB table .groupBy( columns )
functions to organize arrays of objects.
.IP \ \(bu 3n
Aggregate functions including
.IB min( expr ),
.IB max( expr ),
.IB avg( expr )
and
.IB count( expr ).
.IP \ \(bu 3n
A full-featured SQL "SELECT" statement.
.P
JsonCalc also implements many JavaScript operators, functions, and commands.
It does not support classes though, or functions that alter data such as
.BR array .splice().

.SH "INVOCATION EXAMPLES"
.TP
jsoncalc
Start
.B jsoncalc
interactively, without any JSON data initially.
It makes a decent calculator.

.TP
jsoncalc file.json
Start
.B jsoncalc
interactively using the contents of file.json as variable
.I data.

.TP
jsoncalc -d.
Start
.B jsoncalc
interactively.
Any *.json files in the directory "." can be accessed simply by using their
basename as a variable name, e.g. using the name
.I parts
in an expression would load the file
.I parts.json
into the
.I parts
variable.
.TP
jsoncalc -p file.json
Pretty-print file.json.
This is non-interactive because
.BI -O format
was used without
.BR -i .

.SH "EXPRESSION EXAMPLES"
The following examples assume you invoked
.B jsoncalc
as "jsoncalc -dsampledata".

.TP
1+2
This outputs 3.
.B jsoncalc
makes a pretty decent calculator.

.TP
1..10
Output an array of integers from 1 to 10.

.TP
1..10@{n:this, \"n^2\":this*this}
For each element of the array, construct an object.
The @ operator loops over the elements from the left operand (an array)
and applies the right operand (an expression) to them with "this" set to
the array element's value.  The {...} notation is an object generator.
The result is an array of objects, which
.B jsoncalc
classifies as a table,
so it is output as a table.

.TP
test
Output the contents of sampledata/test.json.

.TP
test.scores
Output the "scores" member of the object loaded from sampledata/test.json.
This is a table (array of objects) and the default interactive format is
to output tables in a human-readable grid, so it should look pretty.

.TP
test.scores.orderBy(["name","run"])
Output the same table, but sorted by name and run.

.TP
test.scores@run==1
Only output rows for run 1.
The @ and @@ operators take an array as the left operand and an expression
on the right to filter the array.
If the expression returns a boolean value, then the element is omitted or
kept.

.TP
test.scores@{run,score}
Only output the "run" and "score" columns.
If the right-hand operand of @ or @@ returns a value other than
.B null, true
or
.B false
then it is used instead of the array's element.

.TP
test.scores.groupBy("run")@{run,avgScore:avg(score)}
This groups the records by score, and then computes the average score
within each group.
.BI avg( x )
is an aggregate function, meaning it first accumulates data across all rows
of the data (or all in the group, in this case) and goes back and makes the
cumulative result available when evaluating each row.
The @ operator only adds one row per group.

.TP
test.scores.groupBy("run","total")@{run,avgScore:avg(score)}
The difference here is, groupBy() is passed an extra parameter that causes
an extra row to be added for showing the overall average.

.TP
"select run, avg(score) from test.scores group by run"
This uses an SQL "SELECT" command to extract basically the same information.
Note that SQL will choose a default name for a computed column.
Internally, the SQL "SELECT" is translated to
.B jsoncalc "'s"
native expression syntax so it's about as efficient either way.

.TP
test.scores.groupBy("run")@@{run,avgScore:avg(score)}
The difference between @@ and @ is with groups are used, @ only outputs one
value per group while @@ outputs one item per row.
In this example, we get a separate copy of each row for each name, even though
the name isn't included in the resulting rows.

.TP
test.scores.orderBy("name").groupBy("name")@{name,avgScore:avg(score)}
Compute the average score for each name.
Note that groupBy() only compares adjacent items when grouping, so we
need to explicitly sort by name before we can group by name.
This wasn't an issue when grouping by run because the data was already
sorted by run.

.TP
test..deepest
This outputs the value of test.deep.deeper.deepest.
The ".." operator digs down through multiple layers of objects, if necessary,
to find the requested name.

.TP
emoji
Output the contents of sampledata/emoji.json.
If your terminal doesn't display emoji, try one that does.
The
.BR xfce4-terminal (1)
program handles emoji well.


.SH FILES

.TP
~/.config/jsoncalc/
This directory stores JsonCalc's configuration.
It may also store temporary files such as caches and logs.

.TP
.IR PATH /lib plugin-version .so
Where
.I PATH
is a directory name from $JSONCALCPATH,
this is where a binary plugin may be found.

.TP
.IR PATH /plugin-version .jc
Where
.I PATH
is a directory name from $JSONCALCPATH,
this is where a script plugin may be found.

.SH ENVIRONMENT

.TP
$HOME
This is used to find the
.I ~/.config/jsoncalc
directory.

.TP
$JSONCALCPATH
This is a list of directories where JsonCalc's supporting files might be
found.
The default value is derived from $LDLIBRARYPATH.

.TP
$LDLIBRARYPATH
This is a standard environment variable, used to locate library files.
JsonCalc's plugins are implemented as shared libraries, so if it can't
find a requested library in $JSONCALCPATH then it will 

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR json_calc (3),
.BR bash (1),
.BR xfce4-terminal (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Steve Kirkendall, kirkenda@gmail.com
